> Notes for 10/8/13

Proof Techniques
=====
$$(H_1 \wedge H_2 \wedge \ldots \wedge H_k) \Rightarrow C$$

###Direct Proof
* What to assume: $H_1 \wedge H_2 \wedge \ldots \wedge H_k$
* What to show: $C$

###Proof by Contraposition
* What to assume: $\neg C$
* What to show: at least one hypothesis is false
  * $(\neg H_1 \vee \neg H_2 \vee \ldots \vee \neg H_k)$

### Proof by Contradiction
* What to assume: $(H_1 \wedge H_2 \wedge \ldots \wedge H_k) \wedge \neg C$
* What to show: a contradiction


----
###Example Proof

__Claim__: Let $n$ be an integer. If $n$ is even, then is not odd.

__Proof (contradiction)__:

* Assumptions
    * $n$ is even
    * it is not the case that $n$ is not odd (i.e., __$n$ is odd__)

[NTS: a contradiction]

Since $n$ is even, there exists an integer $k$ such that $n = 2k$.

Because $n$ is odd, there exists an integer $l$ such that $n = 2l + 1$

Therefore, $$
\begin{align}
2k &= 2l+1\\
k &= \frac{2l+1}{2}\\
k &= l + \frac{1}{2}
\end{align}
$$

Since $k - l = \frac{1}{2}$, at least one of $k$, $l$, is not an integer, contradicting claims that $k$ and $l$ were both integers.

Since negating the desired conclusion led to a contradiction, the claim itself is true.

-----

Definitions

* A number is **rational** IFF it can be expressed in the form $p/q$ where $p$ and $q$ are both integers and $q \neq 0$.
* A real number is **irrational** IFF it is not rational.

---

Claim: $\sqrt{2}$ is irrational.

> In a direct proof, we would have to show there is no choice of $p$ and $q$ that would have the property that $\sqrt{2} = p/q$.  This is impossible, so we need to choose a different proof method.

Proof (contradiction): 

Suppose $\sqrt{2}$ is not irrational. This means $\sqrt{2}$ is rational.

[NTS: a contradiction]

Because $\sqrt{2}$ is rational, there exist integers $p$ and $q$ such that $p/q = \sqrt{2}$ and $q \neq 0$.

Furthermore, $p$ and $q$ can be chosen such that $\gcd(p,q) = 1$. Thus, by algebra,

$$
    2 = \frac{p^2}{q^2}\\
    p^2 = 2 q^2
$$

Since $q$ (and thus $q^2$) are integers, $p^2$ is even.

> Fact $\star$: if $n^2$ is even, then $n$ is even.

By fact $\star$, $p$ is even, which means there exists an integer $k$ such that $p = 2k$. Therefore,

$$
(2k) = 2q^2\\
q^2 = \frac{(2k)^2}{2} = \frac{4k^2}{2} = 2k^2
$$

and hence $q^2$ is even.

By fact $\star$, $q$ is also even. Because $p$ and $q$ are both even, their $\gcd \neq 1$. This contradicts an earlier statement.

Thus, negating desired conclusion led to contradiction, so the desired claim is true.

---