More on Relations
====

###Example 1

$R_0 \subseteq \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R}$ with $(x,y) \in R_0 \text{ iff } x\cdot y \geq 1$.

- $(4, 1.3) \in R_0$ because $4\cdot 1.3 \geq 1$
- $(0.2, 0.4) \not \in R_0$ because $0.2\cdot 0.4 < 1$

#### Describing the Relation $R_0$

- Reflexive? **NO!** $(0, 0) \not \in R_0$ because $0 \cdot 0 \not \geq 1$.

- Symmetric? **YES!** Suppose we have a pair $(a, b)\in R_0$. $a \cdot b \geq 1$, which means $b\cdot a \geq 1$. Therefore, $(b,a)\in R_0$ as well.

- Antisymmetric? **NO!** $(4,1.3)\in R_0$ and $(1.3, 4)\in R_0$, but $4 \not = 1.3 $

- Transitive? **NO!** $(0.5, 4) \in R_0$. $(4, 1) \in R_0$. If the relation is transitive, then $(0.5, 1)\in R_0$. But $0.5 \cdot 1 < 1$, so it's not in the relation.

---------------

> "Symmetric" is NOT the opposite of "antisymmetric."

Define $W$ to be the set of nonempty subsets of $\mathbb{N}$.  That is, $W = \mathcal{P}(\mathbb{N})\backslash \{ \emptyset \} $.  For example, $\{3, 5, 6\} \in W$.

Define $T\subseteq W \times W$ as:
$$(X,Y)\in T \; \text{ iff } \; X \cap Y \neq \emptyset$$

<span style="color:blue">In other words, $W$ contains $(X,Y)$ only if $X$ and $Y$ have something in common.</span>

- Reflexive?
    - Suppose $A \in W$. Then $A$ is a nonempty subset of $\mathbb N$, which means $A \cap A \neq \emptyset$. Thus, $(A,A) \in T$.
    - **YES**
- Symmetric?
    - Suppose $(X,Y) \in T$. Then, $X \cap Y \neq \emptyset$. That means $Y \cap X \neq \emptyset$.  Therefore, $(Y,X)\in T$.
    - **YES**
- Antisymmetric?
    - Suppose $(X,Y) \in T$ and $(Y,X) \in T$. Thus, $X \cap Y \neq \emptyset$ and $Y \cap X \neq \emptyset$. Hmm... it seems like we're stuck. Let's try hunting for counterexamples.
    - Counterexample: $(\{1,6\},\{ 1,3,5 \})$, $\{ 1,3,5 \}),(\{1,6\}$ are in $T$, but $\{1,6\} \neq \{ 1,3,5 \}$


-----------
###  Inverse of a Relation
<span style="color:red">
$$R^{-1} = \{ (y,x) \mid (x,y) \in R \}$$
</span>

---------

New Material
====


**Claim**: Let $R$,$S$ be relations on set $U$. If $R$ and $S$ are transitive, then $R \cap S^{-1}$ is transitive.

**Proof**: (direct)

Suppose $R$ and $S$ are transitive. [NTS: $R \cap S^{-1}$ is transitive, which means that for all choices of $x,y,z \in U$, if $(x,y)\in R\cap S^{-1}$ and $(y,z)\in R \cap S^{-1}$, then $(x,z)\in R\cap S^{-1}$]

Consider arbitrary $a,b,c\in U$ such that $(a,b)\in R\cap S^{-1}$ and $(b,c)\in R \cap S^{-1}$.

By definition of $\cap$, 

- $(a,b) \in R$
- $(a,b) \in S^{-1}$
- $(b,c) \in R$
- $(b,c) \in S^{-1}$.

Because $R$ is transitive, we know $(a,c)\in R$.

By definition of $S^{-1}$, $(ba) \in S$ and $(c,b) \in S$.  Because $S$ is transitive, $(c,a)\in S$.  Therefore, $(a,c) \in S^{-1}$.  So $(a,c)\in R$ and $(a,c)\in S^{-1}$.  Therefore, $(a,c)\in R \cap S^{-1}$.

Because $a$,$b$,$c$ were arbitrary, $R \cap S^{-1}$ is transitive.

----------

An **equivalence relation** is a relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.

Example: $=$ as defined over $\mathbb{R}$.

- $\forall x \in \mathbb{R}, \; x=x$
- $\forall x,y  \in \mathbb{R}, \; (x = y \rightarrow y = x)$
- $\forall x,y,z \in \mathbb{R}, \; ((x = y \wedge y = z) \rightarrow (x = z))$

---------

Let $R$ be an equivalence relation on set $A$, and let $w \in A$. The **equivalence class** of $w$ (under $R$) is defined as:

$$[w]_R = \{ b \in A \mid (w,b)\in R \}$$

(i.e., set of all elements of $A$ that $R$ relates to $b$)

------

$$\begin{align}
R_M &= \{ (A,A) .. (E,E), (A,E), (E,A), (B,D), (D,B) \}\\
[A]_{R_M} &= \{A, E\}\\
[B]_{R_M} &= \{ B, D\}\\
[C]_{R_M} &= \{C\}
\end{align}$$